.. _title_Flocculation_Introduction:

**************************
Flocculation  Introduction
**************************

.. code:: python

    # %%
    from aide_design.play import*
    from aguaclara_research.play import*
    from pytexit import py2tex
    from sympy import*
    from scipy.optimize import root
    from scipy.optimize import brentq
    import pandas as pd

Flocculation
============

Flocculation transform inorganic (clays such as `kaolinite, smectite,
etc. and metallic oxy-hydroxides such as goethite and
gibbsite <https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0048969708010103>`__
) and organic (viruses, bacteria and protozoa) primary particles into
flocs (particle aggregates). Flocculation doesn’t remove any particles
from suspension. Instead it causes particle aggregation and then floc
blankets, lamellar sedimentation, and sand filtration will be used to
separate those flocs from the water. Sedimentation can remove flocs more
easily than it can remove primary particles because flocs have a higher
terminal sedimentation velocity. Floc blankets and sand filtration rely
primarily on capture based on interception and interception is much more
efficient when the particles are larger. Thus the purpose of
flocculation is to join **all** of the primary particles together into
flocs.

It is also possible that a difference in a physical property between
primary particles and flocs plays a role in enhanced removal of flocs in
floc blankets and filters. For example, the many relatively weak
connection points between the primary particles in the flocs enables the
flocs to deform. It is possible that deformation plays an important role
right at the moment of collision. Presumably the bond strength required
to lock the colliding particles together is less if the particles can
deform as they are colliding.

Primary particles can’t attach to large flocs
---------------------------------------------

One of the mysteries of flocculation has been why it is such a slow
process and yet it appears to be a very rapid process. Plant operators
observe that with high raw water turbidities that they can see
flocculation progressing after about 0.5 minutes of flocculation. We can
estimate the collision potential, :math:`G\theta` that corresponds to
making visible flocs.

.. math:: \bar G = \sqrt{ \frac{g h_e}{\theta \nu}}

.. code:: python

    HL_floc = 43*u.cm
    HRT = 8 * u.min
    Temperature =20 * u.degC
    G_floc = ((pc.gravity*HL_floc/(HRT*pc.viscosity_kinematic(Temperature)))**0.5).to_base_units()
    print(G_floc)
    Gt_floc = G_floc*HRT
    HRT_floc_visible = 0.5*u.min
    Gt_floc_visible = (G_floc*HRT_floc_visible).to_base_units()
    print(Gt_floc_visible)

Here initial flocculation is visible at a :math:`Gl/theta` of less than
3000. Given that flocculation is visible at this low collision
potential, it is unclear why recommended :math:`Gl/theta` are as high as
100,000. This is one of the great mysteries that motivated the search
for a flocculation model that was based on hypotheses that were
consistent with laboratory and field observations. ## History The
mechanism of particle-particle aggregation was thought to be controlled
by an average surface charge. Apparently no one was able to develop a
model of how that mechanism would influence particle attachment
efficiency and the result was that no predictive models for flocculation
were developed. There were several observations that were at odds with
conventional explanations of flocculation. 1. Efficient flocculation at
coagulant dosages that led to positive surface charge. This led to a
second flocculation mechanism that was called “sweep floc” and that was
used to describe any observations that didn’t fit the charge
neutralization flocculation hypotheses 1. Flocculation time for highly
turbid suspensions was expected to proceed very rapidly and produce very
low turbidity settled water. This expectation was not observed and led
to the hypothesis that flocs were continually breaking up and producing
primary particles or at least very small flocs. 1. The floc break up
hypotheses led to the expectation that high turbidity suspensions would
have significantly higher settled water turbidity than low turbidity
suspensions. This expectation was also not observed.

Evidence that the charge neutralization hypothesis doesn’t explain
flocculation of surface waters has been accumulating for decades.
*Sweep* flocculation has been proposed as an alternative category that
described common observations that didn’t fit the charge neutralization
hypothesis. However, similar to the charge neutralization hypothesis,
the *sweep* hypothesis didn’t result in the development of predictive
equations to describe the process.

For example, in 1992 Ching, Tanaka, and Elimelech published their
research on `Dynamics of coagulation of kaolin particles with ferric
chloride <https://doi.org/10.1016/0043-1354(94)90007-8>`__. They found
that the electrophoretic mobility which is a measure of the clay
particle surface charge was never neutralized at pH 7.8 and was
neutralized at :math:`10\mu M` at pH 6.0. The results were interpreted
by the authors to mean that some combination of sweep floc and charge
patchiness was responsible for the observed results.

`Figure x. Electrophoretic_Mobility for final pH (after coagulant
addition) of 6.0 and 7.8 as a function of :math:`FeCl_3`
dose <https://doi.org/10.1016/0043-1354(94)90007-8>`__

The settled water turbidity was almost independent of pH even though the
electrophoretic mobility was quite different for the two pH values
tested.

`At pH 6.0 the ferric hydroxide precipitates are positively charged and
at pH 7.8 they are close to
neutral <https://doi.org/10.1016/0043-1354(94)90007-8>`__. Thus it is
apparent that neutralization of the clay surface charge can not explain
these results.

`Figure x. Settled water turbidity (jar tests) for final pH (after
coagulant addition) of 6.0 and
7.8. <https://doi.org/10.1016/0043-1354(94)90007-8>`__

Electrostatic charge neutralization hypothesis \* The coagulant
precipitate self aggregates – this is inconsistent with the positive
charge that the electrostatic hypothesis asserts will prevent
aggregation \* Electrostatic repulsion extends only a few nm from the
surface of a particle – and the coagulant adhesive nanoparticles are
many times larger than the reach of the repulsive electrostatic force \*
The hypothesis that London van der Waals forces result in attachment
neglects to account for the presence of water in the system. Water
molecules will also be attracted to surfaces by London van der Waals
forces and thus there will be competition between the coagulant and
water. Thus eliminating repulsion is NOT sufficient to produce a bond
between the particles. (see `hydration repulsion, page
21 <https://vtechworks.lib.vt.edu/bitstream/handle/10919/30137/Chapter1.pdf?sequence=9>`__)
\* `“The theory of DLP was a great step forward in that it appeared to
circumvent the whole intractable problem of many body forces through its
use of measured bulk dielectric response functions. However, it must be
stressed again that it is a perturbation theory. That is, it depends on
the assumption that an intervening liquid between interacting surfaces
has bulk liquid properties up to a molecular distance from the surfaces.
This is thermodynamically inconsistent, being equivalent to the
statement that surface energies (or alternatively, the positions of the
Gibbs dividing surfaces) are changed infinitesimally with distance of
separation. This limits the theory to
``large' distances (Young–Laplace vs. Poisson again) where``\ large’ is
undefined.” <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0001-8686(99)00008-1>`__

.. code:: python

    # %%
    #Assumptions
    Pi_VC = .62 #Vena contracta coefficient of an orifice
    Ke = ((1/Pi_VC**2)-1)**2 #expansion coefficient

    #Functions to calculate key parameters

    def Gave(G_theta,h_floc,Temp):
        """Calculates average G given target minimum collision potential, total headloss, and design temperature
        equation from flocculation slides"""
        G_ave = (pc.gravity*h_floc/(G_theta*pc.viscosity_kinematic(Temp))).to(1/u.s)
        return G_ave

    def restime(G_theta,G_ave):
        """Calculates residence time given collision potential and average G
        equation from flocculation slides"""
        theta = G_theta/G_ave
        return theta


    def Dpipe(Ke,Pi_HS,Q,G_ave,Temp,SDR):
        """Calculates the actual inner diameter of the pipe
        equation from flocculation slides"""
        D_pipe = ((Ke/(2*Pi_HS*pc.viscosity_kinematic(Temp)*G_ave**2))*(4*Q.to(u.m**3/u.s)/np.pi)**3)**(1/7)
        return D_pipe

    def Keactual(ID_pipe,G_ave,Temp,Pi_HS,Q):
        """estimates actual expansion coefficient given the actual inner diameter and other relevant inputs
        equation from flocculation slides"""
        Ke_actual = np.pi**3*ID_pipe**7*G_ave**2*pc.viscosity_kinematic(Temp)*Pi_HS/(32*Q.to(u.m**3/u.s)**3)
        return Ke_actual



    def Aorifice(ID_pipe,Ke_actual,Temp,Q):
        """Calculates the orifice area given pipe inner diameter, expansion coefficient, Temperature, and flow"""
        A1 = (pc.area_circle(ID_pipe)).to(u.cm**2).magnitude #Pipe area
        Nu = pc.viscosity_kinematic(Temp) #kinematic viscocity
        Re = pc.re_pipe(Q,ID_pipe,Nu) #reynolds number

        def f_orif(A2,A1,Ke_actual,Re): #root of this function is the orifice area
            return (2.72+(A2/A1)*(4000/Re))*(1-A2/A1)*((A1/A2)**2-1)-Ke_actual

        A_orifice = (brentq(lambda A2: f_orif(A2,A1,Ke_actual,Re), -1, 2*A1))*u.cm**2 #numerical optimization

        return A_orifice


    def eave(G_ave,Temp):
        """Calculates the average energy dissipation rate"""
        e_ave = (pc.viscosity_kinematic(Temp)*G_ave**2).to(u.mW/u.kg)
        return e_ave

    def Hchip(A_orifice,ID_pipe):
        """This function calculates the height of the chip based on the orifice area and pipe diameter
        The function uses numerical optimization to solve the transcendental equation"""
        A_flow = A_orifice.magnitude #orifice area stripped of units
        r=(ID_pipe/2).magnitude #radius stripped of units
        c = A_flow/r**2 #left hand side of equation

        def f(a,c): #roots of this function are theta
            return a-sin(a)*cos(a)-c

        theta = brentq(lambda a: f(a,c), 0, 13) #numerical optimization
        r_u = r*u.cm #radius with units
        y = r_u - r_u*np.cos(theta) #height of orifice

        H_chip = ID_pipe-y #height of chip
        return H_chip

    def Cost_Length(L_pipe,ND_pipe):
        """This function calculates the total cost of the system and the total length of the system"""
        #Length of pipe and number of fittings needed
        OD_pipe = pipe.OD(ND_pipe)
        Total_Pipe = L_pipe + .5*u.m
        Number_T = np.ceil(Total_Pipe.magnitude)
        Number_Elbow = np.ceil(Total_Pipe.magnitude)

        if ND_pipe.magnitude == 3:
            Cost_T = 3.94*u.dollar
            Cost_Elbow = 3.53*u.dollar
            Cost_Pipe = (17.14/10*(u.dollar/u.foot)).to(u.dollar/u.m)
            Cost_Valve = 10*u.dollar
            Width_T = (3.99*u.inch).to(u.cm)
            Width_Elbow = (3.97*u.inch).to(u.cm)


        if ND_pipe.magnitude ==4:
            Cost_T = 7.16*u.dollar
            Cost_Elbow = 5.40*u.dollar
            Cost_Pipe = (21.5/10*(u.dollar/u.foot)).to(u.dollar/u.m)
            Cost_Valve = 10*u.dollar
            Width_T = (5.06*u.inch).to(u.cm)
            Width_Elbow = (5.06*u.inch).to(u.cm)

        if ND_pipe.magnitude ==6:
            Cost_T = 7.16*u.dollar
            Cost_Elbow = 5.40*u.dollar
            Cost_Pipe = (21.5/10*(u.dollar/u.foot)).to(u.dollar/u.m)
            Cost_Valve = 10*u.dollar
            Width_T = (5.06*u.inch).to(u.cm)
            Width_Elbow = (5.06*u.inch).to(u.cm)


        Total_Cost = Cost_Pipe*Total_Pipe + Cost_T*Number_T + Cost_Elbow*Number_Elbow + Cost_Valve*Number_Elbow
        Floor_Length = Number_T*(Width_T+Width_Elbow-OD_pipe).to(u.m)
        Output=[Total_Cost,Floor_Length]
        return Output

.. code:: python

    #Inputs
    D_Sed = 2.5*u.cm
    A_Sed = pc.area_circle(D_Sed)
    v_Sed = 2*u.mm/u.s
    Q = (v_Sed*A_Sed).to(u.mL/u.s)
    print('The flow rate is',Q)

    Temp = 15*u.degC
    h_floc = 50*u.cm #standard for Aguaclara plants
    G_theta = 20000 #standard for Aguaclara plants
    Pi_HS = 6  ##3-6 is a good range, more research needed
    SDR = 41 #Standard ratio

.. code:: python

    #Calculate G average using functions listed above and given inputs
    G_ave = Gave(G_theta,h_floc,Temp)
    theta = restime(G_theta,G_ave)
    e_ave = eave(G_ave,Temp)
    print('The average G value is ',G_ave)
    print('The residence time in the flocculator is ',theta)
    print('The average energy dissipation rate is ', e_ave)

.. code:: python

    #Calculate the pipe diameter, both inner and nominal and determine area of pipe using inner diameter output
    D_pipe = (Dpipe(Ke,Pi_HS,Q,G_ave,Temp,SDR)).to(u.cm)
    #Calculate nominal diameter of pipe
    ND_pipe = pipe.ND_SDR_available(D_pipe,SDR)
    #Calculate nominal diameter of pipe
    ID_pipe = pipe.ID_SDR(ND_pipe,SDR).to(u.cm)

    ID_pipe = 5*u.mm
    #Calculate inner diameter of pipe
    A_pipe = (pc.area_circle(ID_pipe)).to(u.cm**2)

    print('The ideal inner diameter of the pipe would be ',D_pipe)
    print('The nominal diameter of the pipe is ',ND_pipe, ', and the inner diameter is ', ID_pipe)
    print('The area of the pipe is ', A_pipe)

.. code:: python

    #Calculate the actual Ke as a result of the calculated inner pipe diameter
    Ke_actual = (Keactual(ID_pipe,G_ave,Temp,Pi_HS,Q)).to(u.dimensionless)
    print('The initial expansion minor loss coefficient was ',Ke)
    print('The actual expansion minor loss coefficient is ',Ke_actual)

.. code:: python

    #Calculate the orifice area
    A_orifice = Aorifice(ID_pipe,Ke_actual,Temp,Q)
    print('The orifice area is ',A_orifice)

.. code:: python

    # The following line of code needs to be removed once the orifice area equation is corrected.

    H_chip = Hchip(A_orifice,ID_pipe)
    print('The height of the chip is ', H_chip)

.. code:: python

    #Calculate average velocity
    v_avg = (Q/pc.area_circle(ID_pipe)).to(u.m/u.s) #first calculate average velocity
    print('The average velocity is ',v_avg)

    #Calculate pipe length
    L_pipe = (v_avg*theta).to(u.m) #then multiply velocity by residence time to get the required length of pipe
    print('The length of the pipe is ',L_pipe)

#references `Coagulation and Flocculation in Water and Wastewater
Treatment <https://www.iwapublishing.com/news/coagulation-and-flocculation-water-and-wastewater-treatment>`__,
iwapublishing
