.. code:: python

    import numpy as np

    import pandas as pd

    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

    from aide_design import physchem as pc

    from aide_design.units import unit_registry as u

    from aide_design import utility as ut

    from aide_design import floc_model as floc

DC Mechanical Flocculation Solution
===================================

| In this design challenge, you will design a mechanical flocculator and
  power unit. You will use a flow rate of 50 L/s as your default design
  value. The coldest temperature that the raw water is expected to have
  is 10°C.
| You will also play with fractal flocculation model equations to get a
  sense of how fast flocs can aggregate. You will also explore the floc
  model predictions.

As you define variables, take care not to redefine parameters. One trick
is to use a unique name for variables that are estimates. We often add
“est” to any variable names that aren’t the final values.

The ``floc_model.py`` file contains many useful functions which includes
clay, coagulant and humic acid material properties, fractal model
equations, and flocculation model equations. **We recommend that you
open the ``floc_model.py`` and have it side by side with this design
challenge for easy reference.**

.. raw:: html

   <div class="alert alert-block alert-info">

The course slides found on the syllabus will be very useful for
obtaining and understanding relevant equations for this design challenge
and ones in the future.

Conventional Design Guidelines:
-------------------------------

This table for mechanical flocculators is taken from Sincero and
Sincero’s 1996 textbook: *Environmental Engineering: A Design Approach*

+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Type        | Velocity    | Energy      | Gt          | t (min)     |
|             | Gradient    | Dissipation |             |             |
|             | (G) (1/s)   | Rate        |             |             |
+=============+=============+=============+=============+=============+
| Low         | 20-70       | 0.4 - 4.9   | 50,000 -    | 11 - 210    |
| turbidity,  |             |             | 250,000     |             |
| color       |             |             |             |             |
| removal     |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| High        | 70 - 180    | 4.9 - 32    | 80,000 -    | 7 - 45      |
| turbidity,  |             |             | 190,000     |             |
| solids      |             |             |             |             |
| removal     |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

Dissolved organic matter impacts the color of the water. Perhaps the
reason for lower G values for color removal is because flocs created
from dissolved organic matter are weaker or less dense. Hence, a lower G
is needed to allow them to grow large enough for removal in the
sedimentation tank.

Mechanical Flocculator Design:
------------------------------

The conventional design guidelines provide a range of values with little
guidance on how to select “velocity gradient” or G values. One approach
is to hope for the best and choose a G value in the middle of the range.
We will pick the G value that is apparently appropriate for both low and
high turbidity waters.

.. code:: python

    flow_plant = 50 * u.L/u.s
    G_mech = 70 / u.s
    temp_design = 10 * u.degC

1)
~~

The `Ten State Standards <http://10statesstandards.com/>`__ (with the
hilarious acronym GLUMRB) requires the residence time in a mechanical
flocculator to be 30 minutes. What is the value of Gt if you use the
velocity gradient given above as ``G_mech``?

Note: ``.to(u.dimensionless)`` ensures you don’t get weird dimensions
like kilometer/inch or minute/second for dimensionless parameters.

.. code:: python

    #answer
    time_mech = 30 * u.min
    Gtime_mech= (G_mech * time_mech).to(u.dimensionless)

    print('The Gt is', ut.sig(Gtime_mech,6))

::

    The Gt is 126000

.. _section-1:

2)
~~

Calculate the equivalent average energy dissipation rate (in mW/kg) for
the given velocity gradient at the design temperature.

.. code:: python

    #answer
    ed_rate_mech_ave = (G_mech**2 * pc.viscosity_kinematic(temp_design)).to(u.mW/u.kg)


    print('The equivalent average energy dissipation rate is' , ut.sig(ed_rate_mech_ave,2))

::

    The equivalent average energy dissipation rate is 6.4 mW/kg

.. _section-2:

3)
~~

Create a function to calculate the power requirement for mechanical
flocculators. Then, use your function to obtain the power requirement
for the design temperature. The equation for power is the same one that
we used for mechanical rapid mix units.

.. code:: python

    #answer
    def power_floc_shaft(Q, G, t, temp):
        return (G**2 * Q * t * pc.viscosity_dynamic(temp)).to(u.kW)
    power_mech_floc = power_floc_shaft(flow_plant,G_mech,time_mech,temp_design)
    print('The power requirement is', ut.sig(power_mech_floc,2))

::

    The power requirement is 0.57 kW

Fun Fact: although the design guidelines would logically predict that
the power requirements are higher for cold water, there is little
evidence that mechanical flocculator plants actually increase the power
input to their flocculators when the water is cold.

.. _section-3:

4)
~~

We hypothesize that the \*\* *maximum* \*\* energy dissipation rate in a
flocculator determines the size of the flocs, and those flocs may or may
not be captured by the sedimentation tank. Sedimentation tank
performance will deteriorate if the maximum energy dissipation rate
results in flocs that are so small that their sedimentation velocity is
lower than the capture velocity of the sedimentation tank. This occurs
for very high maximum energy dissipation rates. Mechanical flocculators
have traditionally been designed without insight into the variability of
the energy dissipation rate and the need to keep the maximum energy
dissipation rate low enough to prevent the creation of flocs that will
avoid capture by the sedimentation tanks. At the same time, the
traditional standards likely evolved to produce designs that were at
least reasonable even in the absence of an understanding of the fluid
mechanics of the mixing process.

According to the Ten State Standards, “Agitators (Flocculators) shall be
driven by variable speed drives with the peripheral speed of paddles
ranging from 0.5 to 3.0 feet per second.” Note that they do not specify
the size of the propeller and yet that is a critical dimension that
determines the energy dissipation rate in the wake of the spinning
propeller.

| The wake behind the propeller or paddle is similar in size to the
  small dimension of the propeller or paddle normal to the velocity.
  Thus we can use the propeller height to estimate the energy
  dissipation rate of the plate wake. The relative velocity between the
  wake and the surrounding fluid is approximately equal to the propeller
  velocity.
| - Calculate the maximum energy dissipation rate that occurs in the
  wake behind the tip of a propeller which has a height of 3 cm and is
  moving at 3 ft/s. In this case, assume that the plate ratio for the
  maximum energy dissipation rate in the wake, :math:`\Pi_{Plate}`, is
  0.34.

.. math:: \epsilon=\frac{\left ( \Pi_{Plate}V  \right )^{3}}{W_{Plate}}

You may assume that the relative velocity between propeller and water is
equal to 75% of the propeller velocity.

.. code:: python

    #answer
    ratio_prop_vel = 0.75
    pi_plate = 0.34
    vel_prop = 3 * u.ft/u.s
    height_prop = 3 * u.cm

    ed_rate_prop_max = ((ratio_prop_vel * pi_plate * vel_prop)**3 / height_prop).to(u.mW/u.kg)

    print('The maximum energy dissipation rate behind the propeller tip is', ut.sig(ed_rate_prop_max,3))

::

    The maximum energy dissipation rate behind the propeller tip is 423 mW/kg

.. _section-4:

5)
~~

Calculate the ratio of maximum to average energy dissipation rate
(henceforth referred to as Max/Ave EDR) and the ratio of maximum to
average velocity gradient (Max/Ave G) for the mechanical flocculator
described above. What is the relationship between the two ratios?

.. code:: python

    #answer
    ed_rate_mech_ratio = ed_rate_prop_max / ed_rate_mech_ave
    print('The ratio of maximum to average energy dissipation rate is', ut.sig(ed_rate_mech_ratio,3))

    G_mech_ratio = ed_rate_mech_ratio**0.5
    print('The ratio of maximum to average velocity gradient is', ut.sig(G_mech_ratio,3))

::

    The ratio of maximum to average energy dissipation rate is 66.3
    The ratio of maximum to average velocity gradient is 8.15

SOLUTION NOTE: this information is found on extra slide 48 in the
Flocculator Design slids, heading is “Results of the the CFD analysis
and our model equations.”

| High ratios of Max/Ave for velocity gradients (and therefore also
  energy dissipation rates) are common in both mechanical and hydraulic
  flocculators. A high velocity gradient ratio is a poor design for two
  reasons. - This high Max/Ave G results in significant inefficiency in
  the use of energy for flocculation. This inefficiency requires longer
  residence times and/or more energy input to achieve the same extent of
  flocculation.
| - The high energy dissipation rate in the propeller wake limits the
  amount of energy that can be dissipated without causing excessive floc
  breakup. Excessive floc breakup produces flocs that are too small to
  be captured by the sedimentation tank.

We hypothesize that the maximum G values specified for mechanical
flocculators were likely set by the constraint of not breaking flocs
into small sizes. Sedimentation velocity needs to be less than capture
velocity for a floc to settle - the smallest floc that will settle is
referred to as the threshold floc because that is the smallest size we
want to make. Because well-designed hydraulic flocculators have more
uniform shear rates (as compared to mechanical flocculators), hydraulic
flocculators are less likely to break up flocs. Therefore, the average G
values specified for mechanical flocculators are not expected to apply
to well designed hydraulic flocculators.

The high energy dissipation rates at the tip of a propeller in a
flocculator may be high enough to create flocs that are too small to be
captured by the sedimentation tanks. We will determine if the
sedimentation tank could capture these flocs in the analysis below.

These results also suggest that the traditional emphasis on maintaining
the same or lesser G value for the transport of flocculated water to the
sedimentation tank may have missed the more important point of not
exceeding a value of G that produces flocs that are too small to be
captured by the sedimentation tank.

.. _section-5:

6)
~~

A mechanical flocculator is treating high turbidity water, and therefore
is using an \* **average** \* G value of 180 Hz.

If the design guidelines for maximum G for mechanical flocculators are
correct and are based on floc breakup, then what is the largest \* \*\*
average*\* \* G that could be used for a well designed hydraulic
flocculator with a Max/Ave G of :math:`\sqrt{2}`?

Note: important distinctions to make are: - maximum G vs average G -
mechanical vs hydraulic flocculators. Conceptual thought coupled with
pencil and paper are recommended.

.. code:: python

    #answer
    G_hyd_ratio = np.sqrt(2)
    G_mech_ave_max = 180 * u.Hz
    G_hyd_ave_max = G_mech_ave_max * (G_mech_ratio/G_hyd_ratio)
    print('The maximum G for hydraulic flocculators is', ut.sig(G_hyd_ave_max,4))

::

    The maximum G for hydraulic flocculators is 1037 Hz

These extremely high average G values are more like traditional rapid
mix. It is possible that energy use constraints (too much elevation
difference required to power the flocculation) will prevent use of such
high G values. It is also possible that these G values would cause
excessive floc break up even though they appear to meet conventional
standards.

.. _section-6:

7)
~~

How much energy in Joules per liter would be required to treat the water
using this mechanical flocculator?

.. code:: python

    #answer
    def energy_mech(Q, G, t, temp):
        return (power_floc_shaft(Q, G, t, temp) / Q).to(u.J/u.L)


    print('The energy required using the mechanical flocculator is', ut.sig(energy_mech(flow_plant,G_mech,time_mech,temp_design),3))

::

    The energy required using the mechanical flocculator is 11.5 J/l

.. _section-7:

8)
~~

How much does the electricity cost to flocculate a million liters? It
isn’t necessary to actually size an electric motor for this assignment.
Simply use the shaft power and assume a motor efficiency of 80%. Use the
price of electricity that you obtained in the Rapid Mix design
challenge. Hard code this price as a variable.

.. code:: python

    #answer
    efficiency_motor = 0.8
    electricity_rate = ((0.146 * u.USD) / (u.kW * u.hr))


    electricity_cost_mech = (electricity_rate * energy_mech(flow_plant,G_mech,time_mech,temp_design) / efficiency_motor).to(u.USD/u.ML)
    print('The cost of electricity for mechanical flocculation is', ut.sig(electricity_cost_mech,2))

::

    The cost of electricity for mechanical flocculation is 0.58 USD/Ml

It doesn’t actually cost very much to flocculate water using
electricity. We will create cost savings over mechanical flocculators by
designing smaller, higher performing flocculators that don’t require any
moving parts and thus don’t require much maintenance. Our capital costs
will also be lower because we use more efficient plug flow reactors to
prevent short circuiting of particles through the flocculator.

.. _section-8:

9)
~~

What is the equivalent amount of potential energy that is used to
operate this mechanical flocculator (the shaft power) expressed as an
elevation drop in meters?

.. code:: python

    #answer
    delta_height = (power_floc_shaft(flow_plant,G_mech,time_mech,temp_design) / (flow_plant * pc.density_water(temp_design) * pc.gravity)).to(u.m)

    print('The equivalent amount of potential energy to run this  mechanical flocculator is', ut.sig(delta_height,3))

    print(power_floc_shaft(flow_plant,G_mech,time_mech,temp_design))

::

    The equivalent amount of potential energy to run this  mechanical flocculator is 1.17 m
    0.5730957660614814 kilowatt

.. _section-9:

10)
~~~

What is the required reactor volume for the mechanical flocculator?

.. code:: python

    #answer
    vol_mech = (time_mech * flow_plant).to(u.m**3)
    print('The required reactor volume for the mechanical flocculator is', vol_mech)

::

    The required reactor volume for the mechanical flocculator is 90.0 meter ** 3

.. _section-10:

11)
~~~

If this flocculator is 4 m deep, then how many square meters of plan
view area are required per L/s of flow capacity? This is a measure of
required size of this unit process. For comparison, an AguaClara
sedimentation tank requires about :math:`\frac{1m^{2}}{L/s}` and are
only 2 m deep.

.. code:: python

    #answer
    depth_mech = 4 * u.m
    area_mech = (vol_mech / (depth_mech * flow_plant))
    print('The required plan view area is', area_mech)

::

    The required plan view area is 0.45 meter ** 2 * second / liter

Fractal Flocculation Model
--------------------------

Many of the fractal floc equations are available in the
``floc_model.py`` file in the aide_design repository. You will need to
look through that code to see what functions are available. The
following constants are defined in that file. NTU has been defined as an
approximate empirical relationship between the concentration of kaolin
clay and the turbidity, such that 1 NTU is equivalent to 1.7 mg/L. The
diameter of a primary clay particle is assumed to be 7 micrometers. The
fractal dimension for flocs is defined as ``DIAM_FRACTAL`` and is equal
to 2.3. We are using PACl as a coagulant for this analysis, so you shall
call ``floc.PACl``, when a function within ``floc_model.py`` requires
‘coag’ as an input.

.. raw:: html

   <div class="alert alert-block alert-info">

Look through ``floc_model.py`` within aide_design. You will be using it heavily in the following section
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Whenever possible, use variables defined within ``floc_model.py``
instead of redefining them. Relevant variables defined in
``floc_model.py`` include: 1. ``DIAM_FRACTAL`` Recall in class that
Monroe mentioned that this is not actually a diameter, but rather a
dimension. It has been incorrectly and misleadingly named in
aide_design. It’s value is simply 2.3, and it has no units.

1. ``PACl``
2. ``Clay``

.. _section-11:

12)
~~~

Estimate the diameter of the flocs that interact with the tip of the
impeller of the mechanical flocculator analyzed above. We don’t yet have
a good model to predict maximum floc size as a function of velocity
gradient or energy dissipation rate. We have a rough estimate,
``floc.diam_floc_max(EDRmax)`` based on a small amount of data.

.. code:: python

    #answer
    diam_floc_mech = floc.diam_floc_max(ed_rate_prop_max).to(u.um)
    print('The diameter of the flocs that interact with the impeller is', ut.sig(diam_floc_mech,3)+'.')

::

    The diameter of the flocs that interact with the impeller is 127 um.

.. _section-12:

13)
~~~

Estimate the terminal sedimentation velocity in mm/s of the flocs that
interact with the tip of the impeller of the mechanical flocculator
analyzed above. Use the function ``floc.vel_term_floc``. You may assume
that the flocs were made from a particle suspension that had 1.5 mg/L of
aluminum and 100 NTU of clay.

Note: AguaClara has defined the unit NTU as ``u.NTU``.

.. code:: python

    #answer
    conc_Al = 1.5 * u.mg/u.L
    conc_clay=100*u.NTU
    vel_term_floc_tip = floc.vel_term_floc(conc_Al, conc_clay, floc.PACl,
                                           floc.Clay, floc.DIAM_FRACTAL, 
                                           diam_floc_mech, temp_design).to(u.mm/u.s)

    print('The terminal velocity of flocs that interact with the impeller tip is estimated to be', ut.sig(vel_term_floc_tip,3))

::

    The terminal velocity of flocs that interact with the impeller tip is estimated to be 0.738 mm/s

.. _section-13:

14)
~~~

Would these flocs be captured by a conventional design for a
sedimentation tank `(10 State
Standards) <http://10statesstandards.com/waterrev2012.pdf>`__ with a
capture velocity of 1.2 m/hr? The capture velocity is a property of the
sedimentation tank. If the floc settles faster than the capture
velocity, then theoretically the floc will be captured by the
sedimentation tank.

.. code:: python

    #answer
    vel_capture_10_state = (1.2 * u.m/u.hr).to(u.mm/u.s)
    print('The 10 State Standards capture velocity is', ut.sig(vel_capture_10_state,3))
    print("The 10 State Standards sedimentation tank would capture the flocs that are able to survive the energy dissipation rate at the tip of the propeller. ")

::

    The 10 State Standards capture velocity is 0.333 mm/s
    The 10 State Standards sedimentation tank would capture the flocs that are able to survive the energy dissipation rate at the tip of the propeller. 

These flocs would be removed easily in an AguaClara sedimentation tank
(capture velocity of 0.12 mm/s). However, our use of the empirical
equation to predict the size of these flocs is questionable because we
are extrapolating way beyond the original data. We need more experiments
to characterize the size of flocs as a function of the velocity
gradient.

.. _section-14:

15)
~~~

Estimate the average distance between primary clay particles at the
beginning and end of flocculation given an initial turbidity of 100 NTU
and a target effluent unflocculated clay concentration at the end of
flocculation of less than 1 NTU. Of course, the clay concentration is
actually constant in flocculation since particles are not actually being
removed. But here we are referring to the primary clay particles that
have escaped aggregation and thus are still unattached.

You can do this by figuring it out empirically (brownie points!) or by
looking for a function that finds average distance between particles.

A little extra to think about (not necessary to answer): The AguaClara
floccuation model assumes that primary clay particles mostly attach to
other primary clay particles and not to larger flocs (aggregates of clay
particles). Can you think of why this is?

.. code:: python

    #answer
    init_sep_dist_clay = floc.sep_dist_clay(100 * u.NTU, floc.Clay).to(u.mm)
    final_sep_dist_clay = floc.sep_dist_clay(1 * u.NTU, floc.Clay).to(u.mm)
    print('The average distance between clay particles at 100 NTU is', ut.sig(init_sep_dist_clay,3))
    print('The average distance between clay particles at 1 NTU is', ut.sig(final_sep_dist_clay,3))

::

    The average distance between clay particles at 100 NTU is 0.141 mm
    The average distance between clay particles at 1 NTU is 0.654 mm

.. _section-15:

16)
~~~

What is the inner viscous length scale in the mechanical flocculator at
the maximum energy dissipation rate? Given that this is a very high
energy dissipation rate for flocculation, it corresponds to a very small
inner viscous length scale. This means that eddies are able to survive
down to a small size before viscosity damps their motion. If the
separation distance between clay particles that haven’t turned into
flocs is less than this inner viscous scale, then it is reasonable to
assume that all flocculation is dominated by viscosity. The function
within ``floc_model.py`` that does this is confusingly named
``lamba_vel()``.

.. code:: python

    #answer
    print('The inner viscous length scale is', ut.sig(floc.lambda_vel(ed_rate_prop_max, temp_design).to(u.mm),3))

::

    The inner viscous length scale is 2.39 mm

.. _section-16:

17)
~~~

Below is a graph showing the inner viscous length scale that divides
flows that are dominated by inertia (eddies) from flows where viscosity
is significant. **Add the data point** representing the maximum energy
dissipation rate vs the maximum clay separation distance at the end of
flocculation for the mechanical flocculator you have been designing.

.. code:: python

    #This code is provided to help you make your graph

    #Creates the array for energy dissipation rates (EDRs)
    x = np.logspace(np.log10(1),4)*u.mW/u.kg

    plt.figure('Inner Viscous Scale', (6,6))
    plt.title('Inner Viscous Scale vs Energy Dissipation Rate')

    plt.ylabel('Inner Viscous Scale (mm)')
    plt.xlabel('Energy Dissipation Rate(mW/kg)')

    plt.yscale('log')
    plt.xscale('log')

    plt.grid(b=True, which='major', color='k', linestyle='-', linewidth=1)
    plt.grid(b=True, which='minor', color='k', linestyle='-', linewidth=0.5)

    #floc.lambda_vel, which returns the inner viscous length scale, 
    #is being applied to the array of EDRs for our design temperature
    y = floc.lambda_vel(x,temp_design)
    plt.plot(x, y.to(u.mm), 'r')

    #------------------------------------------------------------------------
    #----------------------------YOUR CODE BELOW-----------------------------
    #------------------------------------------------------------------------
    #answer
    plt.plot(ed_rate_prop_max.to(u.mW/u.kg), final_sep_dist_clay.to(u.mm), 'ko')



    print(final_sep_dist_clay)
    print(ed_rate_prop_max)

    plt.show()

::

    0.6541789493547243 millimeter
    422.57902694348155 milliwatt / kilogram

.. figure:: DC_Mechanical_and_Flocculation_Model_Solution_files/DC_Mechanical_and_Flocculation_Model_Solution_46_1.png
   :alt: png

   png

.. _section-17:

18)
~~~

According to the plot and analysis above, are the collisions between
clay particles at a concentration of 1 NTU dominated by inertia or by
viscosity? Explain why!

The final spacing between clay particles is still smaller than the inner
viscous length scale at which eddies are damped by viscosity. This
suggests that all collisions in flocculation are dominated by viscosity.

.. raw:: html

   <div class="alert alert-block alert-info">

Real-world considerations of flocculation
=========================================

Now that you have an augmented understanding of flocculation theory, we
can consider a few ways in which the theory applies to real-world
flocculators.

In this section, there are no calculations for you to do or code for you
to write - everything has been provided for you. This was done to
shorten this design challenge while still detailing relevant and
important information.

 **There are two conceptual questions for you to answer at the end of
the section.** Read through and focus on understanding the concepts
before you try to answer the questions.

Coagulant distribution in a reactor
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The flocculation model accounts for loss of coagulant nanoparticles to
the reactor walls. The loss of coagulant nanoparticles is assumed to
scale with the area of the flocculator walls divided by the total area
of clay and flocculator walls. This loss is significant for low
turbidity and small scale flocculators, such as the 1 liter per second
flocculator AguaClara recently designed.

Here we will consider a flocculator built out of pipe, not one contained
within a rectangular reactor. The ``diam_tube`` parameter is the
flocculator diameter and is needed to estimate how much of the coagulant
is lost to the walls of the flocculator. We will assume the flocculator
tube is for the 1 L/s plant and has a diameter of 7.5 cm

We will evaluate the situation where the turbidity is 10 NTU and the
coagulant dose is 1 mg/L of aluminum. The code below does the following:

-  Estimates the fraction of coagulant nanoparticles lost to the
   flocculator walls.
-  Estimates the fraction of the clay surface area that is coated with
   nanoparticles.

.. code:: python

    diam_tube = 7.5 * u.cm
    conc_clay = 100*u.NTU
    conc_Al = 0.5*u.mg/u.L


    #floc.ratio_area_clay_total() returns fraction (between 0 and 1) that represents the surface area of 
    #the clay particle over the sum of the surface area of the clay and reactor walls 

    wall_loss = 1 - floc.ratio_area_clay_total(conc_clay, floc.Clay, diam_tube, floc.RATIO_HEIGHT_DIAM)
    print('The fraction of the coagulant lost to the walls is', ut.sig(wall_loss,3))

    #floc.gamma_coag() returns the fraction of clay that is covered by coagulant. This is a very hard parameter 
    #to actually measure, so this is just an estimate.

    fraction_coated = floc.gamma_coag(conc_clay,conc_Al, floc.PACl, 
                                      floc.Clay, diam_tube, floc.RATIO_HEIGHT_DIAM)
    print('The fraction of the clay surface area that is is coated is', ut.sig(fraction_coated,3))

Time scale of flocculation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now we want to estimate the average time required for an initial
successful collision between two primary clay particles that are
partially coated with coagulant nanoclusters. Note that for the first
collision, the current floc size is the same as the clay size. We will
use the average energy dissipation rate for the mechanical flocculator
as found above.

.. code:: python

    ed_rate_mech_ave = 6.4*u.mW/u.kg

    time_first_collision = floc.time_col_laminar(ed_rate_mech_ave, 10*u.degC, 
                                                 conc_Al, conc_clay, floc.PACl, 
                                                 floc.Clay, floc.Clay.Diameter, diam_tube,
                                                 floc.DIAM_FRACTAL, floc.RATIO_HEIGHT_DIAM).to(u.s)

    print('The time required for the first succesful collision is', ut.sig(time_first_collision,3))

This collision time is quite fast and is the origin of the question,
“why does flocculation require 30 minutes?” as mandated in the Ten State
Standards.

AguaClara flocculation model
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We will now briefly consider an AguaClara flocculator design with an
average energy dissipation rate of approximately 11 mW/kg and a
residence time of 8.1 minutes. The design temperature is 15 degC.

Below is a calculation for the Gt value of this flocculator.

.. code:: python

    #answer
    ed_rate_floc_aguaclara = 11*u.mW/u.kg
    time_floc_aguaclara = 8.1*u.minute
    temp_design_aguaclara = 15*u.degC

    #This equation for G can be found in the course slides (all equations you see in design challenges can be found in the slides) 
    G_floc_aguaclara = np.sqrt(ed_rate_floc_aguaclara/pc.viscosity_kinematic(temp_design_aguaclara))
    Gtime_floc_aguaclara = (G_floc_aguaclara*time_floc_aguaclara).to(u.dimensionless)
    print('The AguaClara Gt value is', ut.sig(Gtime_floc_aguaclara,5))

Coagulant coverage fraction of a particle
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This section solves the integrated flocculation model for
:math:`\Gamma`. We simplify the model by recognizing that the spacing
between particles at the end of the flocculation process is much greater
than the initial particle spacing. This means that the raw water
turbidity drops out of the equation. The value of the rate constant for
collisions is k = 0.24. We start with the equation below:

.. math:: \Gamma = \frac{3}{2}\cdot \frac{\Lambda^2 }{\mathit{k} \pi d_{p}^2 Gt }

We then estimate the required coagulant coverage of clay,
:math:`\Gamma`, for the AguaClara flocculator to achieve a 2 NTU settled
water turbidity when starting with a raw water that is 50 NTU.

Note that the specified flocculation model applies to both hydraulic and
mechanical flocculators.

.. code:: python

    #Fitting constant/Sedimentation tank factor
    k = 0.24

    #gamma_aguaclara_design uses functions in floc.py to solve the equation in the problem statement
    conc_clay_goal = 2 * u.NTU
    gamma_aguaclara_design = (3/2) * (floc.sep_dist_clay(conc_clay_goal, floc.Clay)**2
                               / (k * np.pi * (floc.Clay.Diameter * u.m)**2 
                                  * Gtime_floc_aguaclara
                                 )
                              ).to(u.dimensionless)

    print('The Gamma value is', ut.sig(gamma_aguaclara_design,3))

Residence time and coagulant coverage
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you doubled the residence time of the flocculator, the required
coagulant coverage of clay changes according to the model. By doubling
the residence time, the required coagulant coverage is reduced by a
factor of 2.

Modeling flocculation in the presence of humic acid, with pC\* as the performance metric
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The flocculation model predicts the settled water turbidity given the
composition of the raw water, the flocculator characteristics, and a
fitting parameter that must be a function of the sedimentation tank
characteristics. This fitting parameter is k, which is the same as the
rate constant for collisions described above. The model is far from
complete - it doesn’t yet describe the effects of floc blankets. Below
we have created a plot showing model predictions for a range of
coagulant and humic acid (dissolved organic matter) concentrations. The
plot uses our approximation for pC\* described in class and shown below:

.. math:: pC^*=\frac{3}{2}log{(\frac{2}{3}\pi k \frac{d_p^{2}}{\Lambda_0^{2}}Gt\alpha + 1)}

.. code:: python

    #Define the range of coagulant. This is necessary to create plots of pC* as a function of coagulant dose.
    coag_graph = np.linspace(0.01, 2.5, 100) * u.mg/u.L

    # Graph results of a particular NTU. Note that you can change this value to see how the graph responds.
    # A change here even changes the graph title changes!
    plot_NTU = 50*u.NTU

    plt.figure(str(plot_NTU), (6,6))
    plt.title(str(plot_NTU)+' Graph for Various Humic Acid Concentrations')
    plt.ylabel('pC*')
    plt.xlabel('coagulant dosage (mg/L)')

    # Create an array of humic acid concentrations
    plot_humic_acid = np.linspace(0,15,6)*u.mg/u.L

    # Create a function that only has inputs for the values that we will change between plots. 
    #All other variables are taken from predefined values. This simplifies the function call for use in generating the plots.
    def plot_pC(conc_humic_acid):
        k = 0.24
        # The energy dissipation rate for aguaclara designs
        ed_rate = 11*u.mW/u.kg
        #The inner diameter of the flocculator tube is important because a significant fraction of the
        #coagulant ends up attaching to the flocculator walls
        tube_diam = 3/8 * u.inch
        time_floc = 8.1 * u.minute
        temp = 15 * u.degC
        #pc_viscous is the solution for the equation in the problem statement. It returns pC*
        plot_pC = floc.pc_viscous(ed_rate, temp, time_floc, tube_diam,
                                plot_NTU, coag_graph, conc_humic_acid, 
                                floc.HumicAcid, floc.PACl, floc.Clay,
                                k, floc.RATIO_HEIGHT_DIAM)
        return plot_pC

    x = coag_graph.to(u.mg/u.L)
             
    plt.plot(x, plot_pC(plot_humic_acid[0]), 'r',
             x, plot_pC(plot_humic_acid[1]), 'b',
             x, plot_pC(plot_humic_acid[2]), 'g',
             x, plot_pC(plot_humic_acid[3]), 'm',
             x, plot_pC(plot_humic_acid[4]), 'c',
             x, plot_pC(plot_humic_acid[5]), 'y')

    #We can use the array of humic acid concentrations to directly create the legend!
    plt.legend(plot_humic_acid, loc = 'best')
    plt.show()

There is a lot to learn from this graph!!!!!! It appears that for any
given coagulant dose, humic acid concentration significantly affects
pC*. Additionally, notice the diminishing returns of adding more
coagulant. This effect appears to be independent of humic acid
concentration (see the red curve).

Modeling flocculation in the presence of humic acid, with settled water turbidity as the performance metric
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We will now display a similar plot which shows settled water turbidity
instead of pC*. Our initial turbidity is 10 NTU, and we will four curves
for separate humic acid concentrations.

.. code:: python

    #answer
    plot_NTU = 10*u.NTU

    plt.figure(str(plot_NTU), (6,6))
    plt.title(str(plot_NTU)+' Graph')
    plt.ylabel('Settled water turbidity (NTU)')
    plt.xlabel('coagulant dosage (mg/L)')

    def plot_conc_clay(conc_clay, conc_nat_org_mat):
        k = 0.24
        ed_rate = 11*u.mW/u.kg
        #The inner diameter of the flocculator tube is important because a significant fraction of the
        #coagulant ends up attaching to the flocculator walls
        tube_diam = 3/8 * u.inch
        conc_clay = plot_NTU
        time_floc = 8.1 * u.minute
        temp = 15 * u.degC
        #s_t calls on floc.pc_viscous() like the previous cell of code, but also uses the floc.invp() 
        #function to turn pC* back into units of settled water turbididty.
        s_t = floc.invp(floc.pc_viscous(ed_rate, temp, time_floc, tube_diam,
                   conc_clay, coag_graph, conc_nat_org_mat, floc.HumicAcid, floc.PACl, floc.Clay,
                                k, floc.RATIO_HEIGHT_DIAM),conc_clay)

        return s_t

    #Creates array of humic acid concentrations. This was done in the previous code cell with np.linspace, 
    #but because we don't want evenly spaced concentrations here we input our desired values manually
    plot_humic_acid = np.array([0,1,5,20])*u.mg/u.L

    x = coag_graph.to(u.mg/u.L)
    plt.plot(x, plot_conc_clay(plot_NTU, plot_humic_acid[0]), 'r', 
             x, plot_conc_clay(plot_NTU, plot_humic_acid[1]), 'b', 
             x, plot_conc_clay(plot_NTU, plot_humic_acid[2]), 'g',
             x, plot_conc_clay(plot_NTU, plot_humic_acid[3]), 'y')

    plt.legend(plot_humic_acid, loc = 'best')
    plt.show()

Looking at the interactions between coagulant, clay, and humic acid from
this perspective yields even more fun discoveries! For increasing humic
acid concentration, more coagulant is required to even begin the process
of flocculation.

.. _section-18:

19)
~~~

Why does the AguaClara flocculation model predict that adding 1 mg/L of
aluminum has no effect on turbidity when the humic acid concentration is
20 mg/L?

Your Answer Here
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

At low concentrations of coagulant every coagulant nanoparticle surface
is completely coated with humic acid and thus they aren’t sticky at all.

.. _section-19:

20)
~~~

It is tempting to assume that all the coagulant dosed gets attached to
clay particles. However, if a plant operator were to make this
assumption, their plant would produce low-quality water.

Identify and explain two significant reasons as to why this assumption
fails.

.. _your-answer-here-1:

Your Answer Here
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1. Coagulant is lost to the walls of the reactors
2. Coagulant is lost to humic acid
   (Students need to write more than this)
