Design Challenge 1, learning Python, Jupyter, and some AguaClara Design Functions
=================================================================================

1)
~~

Calculate the minimum inner diameter of a PVC pipe that can carry a flow
of at least 10 L/s for the town of Ojojona. The population is 4000
people. The water source is a dam with a surface elevation of 1500 m.
The pipeline connects the reservoir to the discharge into a distribution
tank at an elevation of 1440 m. The pipeline length is 2.5 km. The
pipeline is made with PVC pipe with an SDR (standard diameter ratio) of
26.

The pipeline inlet at the dam is a square edge with a minor loss
coefficient (:math:`{K_e}`) of 0.5. The discharge at the top of the
distribution tank results in a loss of all of the kinetic energy and
thus the exit minor loss coefficient is 1. See the minor loss equation
below.

:math:`{h_e} = {K_e}\frac{{{V^2}}}{{2g}}`

The water temperature ranges from 10 to 30 Celsius. The roughness of a
PVC pipe is approximately 0.1 mm. Use the fluids functions to calculate
the minimum inner pipe diameter to carry this flow from the dam to the
distribution tank.

Report the following \* critical design temperature \* kinematic
viscosity (maximum viscosity will occur at the lowest temperature) \*
the minimum inner pipe diameter (in mm). Use complete sentences to
report the results and use 2 significant digits (use the sig function).

.. code:: python

    SDR = 26
    Q = 10 * u.L/u.s
    delta_elevation = 1500 * u.m - 1440 * u.m
    L_pipe = 2.5 * u.km
    # am using 0 minor losses because pipe diameter function fails if not zero.
    K_minor = 1.5
    # The maximum viscosity will occur at the lowest temperature.
    T_crit = u.Quantity(10,u.degC)
    nu = pc.viscosity_kinematic(T_crit)
    e = 0.1 * u.mm
    pipeline_ID_min = pc.diam_pipe(Q,delta_elevation,L_pipe,nu,e,K_minor)
    print('The critical water temperature for this design is '+ str(T_crit)+'.')
    print('The kinematic viscosity of water is '+ut.sig(nu,2)+'.')
    print('The minimum pipe inner diameter is '+ ut.sig(pipeline_ID_min.to(u.mm),2)+'.')

::

    The critical water temperature for this design is 10 degC.
    The kinematic viscosity of water is 1.3e-6 m²/s.
    The minimum pipe inner diameter is 97 mm.

.. _section-1:

2)
~~

Find the nominal diameter of a PVC pipe that is SDR 26. SDR means
standard diameter ratio. The thickness of the pipe wall is 1/SDR of the
outside diameter. The pipedatabase file has a useful function that
returns nominal diameter given SDR and inner diameter.

.. code:: python

    pipeline_ND = pipe.ND_SDR_available(pipeline_ID_min,SDR)
    print('The nominal diameter of the pipeline is '+ut.sig(pipeline_ND,2)+' ('+ut.sig(pipeline_ND.to(u.mm),2)+').')

::

    The nominal diameter of the pipeline is 4.0 in (1.0e+2 mm).

.. _section-2:

3)
~~

What is the actual inner diameter of this pipe in mm? Compare this with
the `reported inner diameter for SDR-26
pipe <http://www.cresline.com/pdf/cresline-northwest/pvcpressupipeline_Re/CNWPVC-26.pdf>`__
to see if our pipe database is reporting the correct value.

.. code:: python

    pipeline_ID = pipe.ID_SDR(pipeline_ND,SDR)
    cresline_ID = 4.154*u.inch
    print('The inner diameter of the pipe is '+ut.sig(pipeline_ID.to(u.mm),3)+'.')
    print('Cresline reports the inner diameter is '+ut.sig(cresline_ID.to(u.mm),3)+'.')

::

    The inner diameter of the pipe is 106 mm.
    Cresline reports the inner diameter is 106 mm.

.. _section-3:

4)
~~

What is the maximum flow rate that can be carried by this pipe at the
coldest design temperature? Display the flow rate in L/s using the .to
method.

.. code:: python

    pipeline_Q_max = pc.flow_pipe(pipeline_ID,delta_elevation,L_pipe,nu,e,K_minor)
    print('The maximum flow rate at '+ut.sig(T_crit,2)+' is '+ut.sig(pipeline_Q_max.to(u.L/u.s),2)+'.')

::

    The maximum flow rate at 10 celsius is 13 l/s.

.. _section-4:

5)
~~

What is the Reynolds number and friction factor for this maximum flow?
Assign these values to variable names so you can plot them later on the
Moody diagram.

.. code:: python

    pipeline_Re = pc.re_pipe(pipeline_Q_max,pipeline_ID,nu)
    fPipe = pc.fric(pipeline_Q_max,pipeline_ID,nu,e)
    print('The Reynolds number and friction factor for the pipeline flow are '+ut.sig(pipeline_Re,2)+' and '+ut.sig(fPipe,2)+' respectively.')

::

    The Reynolds number and friction factor for the pipeline flow are 1.2e+5 and 0.022 respectively.

.. _section-5:

6)
~~

Check to see if the fluids functions are internally consistent by
calculating the head loss given the flow rate that you calculated and
comparing that head loss with the elevation difference. Display enough
significant digits to see the difference in the two values. Note that
the Moody diagram has an accuracy of about ±5% for smooth pipes and ±10%
for rough pipes `Moody,
1944 <http://user.engineering.uiowa.edu/~me_160/lecture_notes/MoodyLFpaper1944.pdf>`__.

.. code:: python

    HLCheck = pc.headloss(pipeline_Q_max,pipeline_ID,L_pipe,nu,e,K_minor)
    print('The head loss is '+ut.sig(HLCheck,3)+' and that is close to the elevation difference of '+ut.sig(delta_elevation,3)+'.')

::

    The head loss is 60.5 m and that is close to the elevation difference of 60.0 m.

.. _section-6:

7)
~~

How much more water (both volumetric and mass rate) will flow through
the pipe at the maximum water temperature of 30 C? Take into account
both the change in viscosity (changes the flow rate) and the change in
density (changes the mass rate). Report the flow rates in L/s.

.. code:: python

    Tmax = u.Quantity(30,u.degC)
    nuhot = pc.viscosity_kinematic(Tmax)
    pipeline_Q_maxhot = pc.flow_pipe(pipeline_ID,delta_elevation,L_pipe,nuhot,e,K_minor)
    QDelta = pipeline_Q_maxhot-pipeline_Q_max
    MassFlowDelta = (pipeline_Q_maxhot*DensityWater(Tmax)-pipeline_Q_max*DensityWater(T_crit)).to_base_units()
    print('The increase in flow rate at '+ut.sig(Tmax,2)+' is '+ut.sig(QDelta.to(u.L/u.s),2)+'.')
    print('The increase in mass rate at '+ut.sig(Tmax,2)+' is '+ut.sig(MassFlowDelta,2)+'.')

::

    The increase in flow rate at 30 celsius is 0.24 l/s.
    The increase in mass rate at 30 celsius is 0.19 kg/s.

.. _section-7:

8)
~~

Why is the flow increase due to this temperature change so small given
that viscosity actually changed significantly (see the calculation
below)?

.. code:: python

    print('The viscosity ratio for the two temperatures was '+ut.sig(pc.viscosity_kinematic(Tmax)/pc.viscosity_kinematic(T_crit),2)+'.')

::

    The viscosity ratio for the two temperatures was 0.62.

The flow is turbulent and thus viscosity has little influence on the
flow rate.

.. _section-8:

9)
~~

Suppose an AguaClara plant is designed to be built up the hill from the
distribution tank. The transmission line will need to be lengthened by
30 m and the elevation of the inlet to the entrance tank will be 1450 m.
The rerouting will also require the addition of 3 elbows with a minor
loss coefficient of 0.3 each. What is the new maximum flow from the
water source?

.. code:: python

    delta_elevationnew = 1500*u.m - 1450*u.m
    L_pipenew = 2.5*u.km + 30*u.m
    Knew = 1.5+3*0.3
    pipeline_Q_maxnew = pc.flow_pipe(pipeline_ID,delta_elevationnew,L_pipenew,nu,e,Knew)
    print('The new maximum flow rate at '+ut.sig(T_crit,2)+' is '+ut.sig(pipeline_Q_maxnew.to(u.L/u.s),2)+'.')

::

    The new maximum flow rate at 10 celsius is 12 l/s.

.. _section-9:

10)
~~~

How much less water will flow through the transmission line after the
line is rerouted?

.. code:: python

    print('The reduction in flow is '+ut.sig((pipeline_Q_max-pipeline_Q_maxnew).to(u.L/u.s),2)+'.')

::

    The reduction in flow is 1.3 l/s.

.. raw:: html

   <div class="alert alert-block alert-danger">

We noticed that many of you are having some difficulty with naming
convention and syntax.

Please refer to the following for Github [Standards Page]
(https://github.com/AguaClara/aide_design/wiki/Standards) for naming
standards.

Additionally, here is a Github [Variable Naming Guide]
(https://github.com/AguaClara/aide_design/wiki/Variable-Naming) that
will be useful for creating variable names.

.. _section-10:

11)
~~~

There exists a function within the physchem file called
``pc.fric(FlowRate, Diam, Nu, PipeRough)`` that returns the friction
factor for both laminar and turbulent flow. In this problem, you will be
creating a new function which you shall call ``fofRe()`` that takes the
Reynolds number and the dimensionless pipe roughness (ε/D) as inputs.

Recall that the format for defining a function is

``def fofRe(input1, input2):     f = buncha stuff     return f``

Since the equation for calculating the friction factor is different for
laminar and turbulent flow (with the transition Reynolds number being
defined within the physchem file), you will need to use an ``if, else``
statement for the two conditions. The two friction factor equations are
given in the **Assorted Fluids Functions** table.

.. code:: python

    #returns the friction factor for pipe flow for both laminar and turbulent flows
    def fofRe(Re,roughness):
        if Re >= pc.RE_TRANSITION_PIPE:
            f = 0.25/(math.log10(roughness/(3.7)+5.74/Re**0.9))**2
        else:
            f = 64/Re
        return f

.. _section-11:

12)
~~~

.. raw:: html

   <div class="alert alert-block alert-danger">

Need to update picture!

Create a beautiful Moody diagram. Include axes labels and show a legend
that clearly describes each plot. The result should look like the
picture of the graph below.\ |image0|

12a)
~~~~

You will be creating a Moody diagram showing Reynolds number vs friction
factor for multiple dimensionless pipe roughnesses. The first step to do
this is to define the number of dimensionless pipe roughnesses you want
to plot. We will plot 8 curves for the following values: 0, 0.0001,
0.0003, 0.001, 0.003, 0.01, 0.03, 0.1. We will plot an additional curve,
which will be a straight line, for laminar flow, since it is not
dependent on the pipe roughness value (see the Moody diagram above).

-  Create an array for the dimensionless pipe roughness values, using
   ``np.array([])``.
-  Specify the amount of data points you want to plot for each curve. We
   will be using 50 points.

Because the Moody diagram is a log-log plot, we need to ensure that all
50 points on the diagram we are creating are equally spaced in
log-space. Use the ``np.logspace(input1, input2, input3)`` function to
create an array for turbulent Reynolds numbers and an array for laminar
Reynolds numbers. \* ``input1`` is the exponent for the lower bound of
the range. For example, if you want your lower bound to be 1000, your
input should be ``math.log10(1000)`` which is equal to 3. \* ``input2``
is the exponent for the upper bound of the range. Format this input as
you have formatted ``input1``. \* ``input3`` is the number of data
points you are using for each curve. Note: The range for array that yo

**12a) Deliverables** \* Array of dimentionless pipe roughnesses. Call
this array ``eGraph``. \* Variable defining the amount of points on each
pipe roughness curve \* Two arrays created using ``np.logspace`` which
for turbulent and laminar Reynolds numbers, which will be the x-axis
values for the Moody diagram

Note: The bounds for the laminar Reynolds numbers array should span
between 670 and the predefined transition number used in Problem 11. The
bounds for the turbulent Reynolds numbers array should span between
3,500 and 100,000,000. These ranges are chosen to make the curves fit
well within the graph and to intentionally omit data in the transition
range between laminar and turbulent flows.

.. code:: python

    eGraph = np.array([0,0.0001,0.0003,0.001,0.003,0.01,0.03,0.1])
    Gpoint = 50
    ReG = np.logspace(math.log10(3500), 8, Gpoint)
    ReLam = np.logspace(math.log10(670),math.log10(pc.RE_TRANSITION_PIPE),Gpoint)

12b)
~~~~

Now you will create the y-axis values for turbulent flow (based on
dimensionless pipe roughness) and laminar flow (not based on
dimensionless pipe roughness). To do this, you will use the ``fofRe()``
function you wrote in Problem 11 to find the friction factors.

Begin by creating an empty 2-dimensional array that will be populated by
the turbulent-flow friction factors for each dimensionless pipe
roughness. Use ``np.zeros(number of rows, number of columns)``. The
number of rows should be the number of dimensionless pipe roughness
values (``len(eGraph)``), while the number of columns should be the
number of data points per curve as defined above.

Populating this array with friction factor values will require two
``for`` loops, one to iterate through rows and one to iterate through
columns. Recall that ``for`` loop syntax is as follows:

``example = np.zeros((40, 30)) for i in range(0, 40):     for j in range(0, 30):         example[i,j] = function(buncha[i],stuff[j])``

where ``buncha`` and ``stuff`` are arrays.

You will repeat this process to find the friction factors for laminar
flow. The only difference between the turbulent and laminar friction
flow arrays will be that the laminar array will only have one dimension
since it does not affected by the dimensionless pipe roughness. Start by
creating an empty 1-dimensional array and then use a single ``for``
loop.

**12b) Deliverables** \* One 1-D array containing friction factor values
for laminar flow. \* One 2-D array containing friction factor values for
each dimensionless pipe roughness for turbulent flow.

.. code:: python

    fLam = np.zeros(Gpoint)
    for i in range(0,Gpoint):
        fLam[i] = fofRe(ReLam[i],0)

    fG = np.zeros((len(eGraph),Gpoint))
    for i in range(0,len(eGraph)):
        for j in range(0, Gpoint):
            fG[i,j]=fofRe(ReG[j],eGraph[i])

    ###Another way (probably better) is to make only 1 for loop like the following example
    #fLam_opt = np.zeros((1,Gpoint))
    #fG_opt = np.zeros((len(eGraph),Gpoint))

    #for i in range(0, Gpoint):
     #   fLam_opt[0,i] = fofRe(1,ReLam[i])
     #   for j in range(0, len(eGraph)):
     #      fG_opt[j,i] = fofRe(eGraph[j],ReG[i])

12c)
~~~~

Now, we are ready to start making the Moody diagram!!!!!1!!! The plot
formatting is included for you in the cell below. You will add to this
cell the code that will actually plot the arrays you brought into
existence in 12a) and 12b) with a legend. For the sake of your own
sanity, please only add code where specified.

-  First, plot your arrays. See the plots in the tutorial above for the
   syntax. Recall that each dimensionless pipe roughness is a separate
   row within the 2-D array you created. To plot these roughnesses as
   separate curves, use a ``for`` loop to iterate through the rows of
   your array. To plot all columns in a particular row, use the
   ``[1,:]`` call on an array, where 1 is the row you are calling.

-  Plotting the laminar flow curve does not require a ``for`` loop
   because it is a 1-D array.

   -  Use a linewidth of 4 for all curves.

-  Now plot the data point you calculated in DC Python Tutorial 1,
   conveniently located a few problems above this one. Use the Reynolds
   number and friction factor obtained in Problem 5. Because this is a
   single point, it should be plotted as a circle instead of a line.
   Because a line composed of a single point does not exist.

-  You will need to make a legend for the graph using
   ``leg = plt.legend(stringarray, loc = 'best')``

   -  The first input, ``stringarray``, must be an array composed of
      strings instead of numbers. The array you created which contains
      the dimensionless pipe roughness values (``eGraph``) can be
      converted into a string array for your legend
      (``eGraph.astype('str'))``. You will need to add ‘Laminar’ and
      ‘Pipeline’ as strings to the new ``eGraph`` string array. Perhaps
      you will find ``np.append(basestring, [('string1','string2')])``
      to be useful ;)

.. code:: python

    #Set the size of the figure to make it big!
    plt.figure('ax',(10,8))


    #--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    #---------------------WRITE CODE BELOW-------------------------------------------------
    #--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    #You should begin by plotting your data.

    for i in range(len(fG)):
        plt.plot( ReG,fG[i,:], '-', linewidth = 4)

    #fig = plt.figure()
    plt.plot(ReLam,fLam,'k-',linewidth = 4)

    plt.plot(pipeline_Re,fPipe,'ko')

    #Your legend should go below. If you try to make your legend before you make you plot your data, the legend will not show and you will be dazed and confused.
    mylegend = np.append(eGraph.astype('str'),[('laminar', 'Pipeline')])
    leg = plt.legend(mylegend, loc='best')

    #--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    #---------------------WRITE CODE ABOVE-------------------------------------------------
    #--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    #LOOK AT ALL THIS COOL CODE!
    plt.yscale('log')
    plt.xscale('log')
    plt.grid(b=True, which='major', color='k', linestyle='-', linewidth=0.5)

    #Set the grayscale of the minor gridlines. Note that 1 is white and 0 is black.
    plt.grid(b=True, which='minor', color='0.5', linestyle='-', linewidth=0.5)

    #The next 2 lines of code are used to set the transparency of the legend to 1.
    #The default legend setting was transparent and was cluttered.


    plt.xlabel('Reynolds number', fontsize=30)
    plt.ylabel('Friction factor', fontsize=30)

    plt.show()

.. figure:: DC_Python_Tutorial_2_Solution_files/DC_Python_Tutorial_2_Solution_100_0.png
   :alt: png

   png

.. _section-12:

13)
~~~

Researchers in the AguaClara laboratory collected the following head
loss data through a 1/8" diameter tube that was 2 m long using water at
22°C. The data is in a comma separated data (.csv) file named
`‘Head_loss_vs_Flow_dosing_tube_data.csv’ <https://github.com/AguaClara/CEE4540_DC/blob/master/Head_loss_vs_Flow_dosing_tube_data.csv>`__.
Use the pandas read csv function (``pd.read_csv('filename.csv')``) to
read the data file. Display the data so you can see how it is formatted.

.. code:: python

    head_loss_data = pd.read_csv('Head_loss_vs_Flow_dosing_tube_data.csv')
    head_loss_data



14)
~~~

Using the data table from Problem 13, assign the head loss **and flow
rate** data to separate 1-D arrays. Attach the correct units.
``np.array`` can extract the data by simply inputting the text string of
the column header. Here is example code to create the first array:

``HL_data=np.array(head_loss_data['Head loss (m)'])*u.m``

.. code:: python

    HL_data = np.array(head_loss_data['Head loss (m)'])*u.m
    Q_data = np.array(head_loss_data['Flow rate (mL/min)'])*u.mL/u.min

.. _section-14:

15)
~~~

Calculate and report the maximum and minimum Reynolds number for this
data set. Use the tube and temperature parameters specified in Problem
13. Use the ``min`` and ``max`` functions which take arrays as their
inputs.

.. code:: python

    D_tube=1/8*u.inch
    L_tube=2*u.m
    T_data=u.Quantity(22,u.degC)
    nu_data=pc.viscosity_kinematic(T_data)
    Re_data_max=max(pc.re_pipe(Q_data,D_tube,nu_data))
    Re_data_min=min(pc.re_pipe(Q_data,D_tube,nu_data))
    print('The Reynolds number varied from '+ut.sig(Re_data_min,2)+' to '+ut.sig(Re_data_max,2)+'.')

The Reynolds number varied from 2.9e+2 to 1.0e+3.

.. _section-15:

16)
~~~

You will now create a graph of headloss vs flow for the tube mentioned
in the previous problems. This graph will have two sets of data: the
real data contained within the csv file and some theoretical data. The
theoretical data is what we would expect the headloss through the tube
to be in an ideal world for any given flow. When calculating the
theoretical headloss, assume that minor losses are negligible. Plot the
data from the csv file as individual data points and the theoretical
headloss as a continuous curve. Make the y-axis have units of cm and the
x-axis have units of mL/s.

A few hints. \* To find the theoretical headloss, you will first need to
create an array of different flow values. While you could use the values
in the csv file that you extracted in Problem 14, we would instead like
you to create an array of 50 equally-spaced flow values. These values
shall be between the minimum and maximum flows in the csv file. \* You
can use the ``np.linspace(input1, input2, input3)`` function to create
this set of equally-spaced flows. Inputs for ``np.linspace`` are the
same as they were for ``np.logspace``, which was used in Problem 12a).
Linspace does not work with units; you will need to remove the units
(using ``.magnitude``) from the inputs to ``np.logspace`` and then
reattach the correct units of flow after creating the array. \* The
``pc.headloss_fric`` function can handle arrays as inputs, so that makes
it easy to produce the theoretical headloss array once you have finished
your equally-spaced flow array. \* When using ``plt.plot``, make sure to
convert the flow and headloss data to the desired units.

.. code:: python

    Qpoint=50

    QGraph= np.linspace((min(Q_data).to(u.mL/u.s)).magnitude, (max(Q_data).to(u.mL/u.s)).magnitude, Qpoint)*u.mL/u.s


    plt.plot(Q_data.to(u.mL/u.s),HL_data.to(u.cm),'o')
    plt.plot(QGraph.to(u.mL/u.s),pc.headloss_fric(QGraph,D_tube,L_tube,nu_data,0*u.mm).to(u.cm), '-',linewidth=2)


    leg=plt.legend(['data','theoretical major losses'], loc='best')
    #leg.get_frame().set_alpha(1)
    plt.xlabel('Flow rate (mL/s)')
    plt.ylabel('Head loss (cm)')
    plt.show()

.. figure:: DC_Python_Tutorial_2_Solution_files/DC_Python_Tutorial_2_Solution_108_0.png
   :alt: png

   png

The theoretical model doesn’t fit the data very well. We assumed that
major losses dominated. But that assumption was wrong. So let’s try a
more sophisticated approach where we fit minor losses to the data. Below
we demonstrate the use of the `scipy curve_fit
method <https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.optimize.curve_fit.html#scipy.optimize.curve_fit>`__
to fit the minor loss coefficient given this data set. In this example,
``Q_data`` is the flow rate array for the csv file from problem 13. You
should re-name this variable below to whatever you titled this variable.

.. code:: python

    from scipy.optimize import curve_fit

    # Define a new function that calculates head loss given the flow rate
    # and the parameter that we want to use curve fitting to estimate
    # Define the other known values inside the function because we won't be passing those parameters to the function.

    def HL_curvefit(FlowRate, KMinor):
        # The tubing is smooth AND pipe roughness isn't significant for laminar flow.
        PipeRough = 0*u.mm
        L_tube = 2*u.m
        T_data = u.Quantity(22,u.degC)
        nu_data = pc.viscosity_kinematic(T_data)
        D_tube = 1/8*u.inch
        # pass all of the parameters to the head loss function and then strip the units so
        # the curve fitting function can handle the data.
        return (pc.headloss(FlowRate, D_tube, L_tube, nu_data, PipeRough, KMinor)).magnitude

    # The curve fit function will need bounds on the unknown parameters to find a real solution.
    # The bounds for K minor are 0 and 20.

    # The curve fit function returns a list that includes the optimal parameters and the covariance.

    popt, pcov = curve_fit(HL_curvefit, Q_data, HL_data, bounds=[[0.],[20]])

    K_minor_fit = popt[0]

    # Plot the raw data
    plt.plot(Q_data.to(u.mL/u.s), HL_data.to(u.cm), 'o', label='data')

    # Plot the curve fit equation.
    plt.plot(Q_data.to(u.mL/u.s), ((HL_curvefit(Q_data, *popt))*u.m).to(u.cm), 'r-', label='fit')
    plt.xlabel('Flow rate (mL/s)')
    plt.ylabel('Head loss (cm)')
    plt.legend()
    plt.show()

    #Calculate the root mean square error to estimate the goodness of fit of the model to the data
    RMSE_Kminor = (np.sqrt(np.var(np.subtract((HL_curvefit(Q_data, *popt)),HL_data.magnitude)))*u.m).to(u.cm)
    print('The root mean square error for the model fit when adjusting the minor loss coefficient was '+ut.sig(RMSE_Kminor,2))

.. figure:: DC_Python_Tutorial_2_Solution_files/DC_Python_Tutorial_2_Solution_110_0.png
   :alt: png

   png

The root mean square error for the model fit when adjusting the minor
loss coefficient was 0.39 cm

.. _section-16:

17)
~~~

Repeat the analysis from the previous cell, but this time assume that
the minor loss coefficient is zero and that diameter is the unknown
parameter. The bounds specified in the line beginning with
``popt, pcov`` should be changed from the previous question (which had
bounds from 0 to 20) to the new bounds of 0.001 to 0.01.

Hint: Don’t think too much about this, you only need to change the name
of the defined function (perhaps “``HL_curvefit2``”?) and adjust its
inputs/values.

.. code:: python

    # Define a new function that calculates head loss given the flow rate
    # and the parameter that we want to use curve fitting to estimate
    # Define the other known values inside the function because we won't be passing those parameters to the function.

    def HL_curvefit2(FlowRate, D_tube):
        # The tubing is smooth AND pipe roughness isn't significant for laminar flow.
        PipeRough = 0*u.mm
        L_tube=2*u.m
        T_data=u.Quantity(22,u.degC)
        nu_data=pc.viscosity_kinematic(T_data)
        KMinor=0
        # pass all of the parameters to the head loss function and then strip the units so
        # the curve fitting function can handle the data.
        return (pc.headloss(FlowRate, D_tube, L_tube, nu_data, PipeRough, KMinor)).magnitude

    # The curve fit function will need bounds on the two unknown parameters to find a real solution.
    # The bounds for the diameter are 1 to 10 mm and must be given in meters.
    # The curve fit function returns a list that includes the optimal parameters and the covariance.

    popt, pcov = curve_fit(HL_curvefit2, Q_data, HL_data, bounds=[[0.001],[0.01]])

    D_tube_fit = popt[0]*u.m

    # Plot the raw data
    plt.plot(Q_data.to(u.mL/u.s), HL_data.to(u.cm), 'o', label='data')

    # Plot the curve fit equation.
    plt.plot(Q_data.to(u.mL/u.s), ((HL_curvefit2(Q_data, *popt))*u.m).to(u.cm), 'r-', label='fit')
    plt.xlabel('Flow rate (mL/s)')
    plt.ylabel('Head loss (cm)')
    plt.legend()
    plt.show()

    #Calculate the root mean square error to estimate the goodness of fit of the model to the data
    RMSE_Diameter = (np.sqrt(np.var(np.subtract((HL_curvefit2(Q_data, *popt)),HL_data.magnitude)))*u.m).to(u.cm)
    print('The root mean square error for the model fit when adjusting the diameter was '+ut.sig(RMSE_Diameter,2))

.. figure:: DC_Python_Tutorial_2_Solution_files/DC_Python_Tutorial_2_Solution_112_0.png
   :alt: png

   png

The root mean square error for the model fit when adjusting the diameter
was 0.47 cm

.. _section-17:

18
~~

Changes to which of the two parameters, minor loss coefficient or tube
diameter, results in a better fit to the data?

The root mean square error was smaller when the minor loss coefficient
was varied to fit the data.

.. _section-18:

19
~~

What did you find most difficult about learning to use Python? Create a
brief example as an extension to this tutorial to help students learn
the topic that you found most difficult.

Final Pointer
-------------

It is good practice to select Restart & Run All from the Kernel menu
after completing an assignment to make sure that everything in your
notebook works correctly and that you haven’t deleted an essential line
of code!

.. code:: python

    #I had trouble with the for loop and filling an array and plotting that array
    #Problem: use a for loop to make an array where each point is a sum of the indices
    #ex array[1,1]=2, etc

    array=np.zeros((2,2))

    for i in range(2): #if you want to start from 0, you don't need to include 0, but if you
        for j in range(2): #wanted a range going from 1 to 7 you would put range(1,7)
            array[i,j]=i+1+j+1 #python starts to count from 1

    print(array)

[[ 2. 3.] [ 3. 4.]]

.. code:: python

    print('I found creating arrays to be particularly difficult. For example, creating an empty 2-D array with 30 rows and 2 columns shown below')
    #Example of how to create a 2-D array of zeros
    example = np.zeros((30,2))
    example

I found creating arrays to be particularly difficult. For example,
creating an empty 2-D array with 30 rows and 2 columns shown below

array([[ 0., 0.], [ 0., 0.], [ 0., 0.], [ 0., 0.], [ 0., 0.], [ 0., 0.],
[ 0., 0.], [ 0., 0.], [ 0., 0.], [ 0., 0.], [ 0., 0.], [ 0., 0.], [ 0.,
0.], [ 0., 0.], [ 0., 0.], [ 0., 0.], [ 0., 0.], [ 0., 0.], [ 0., 0.], [
0., 0.], [ 0., 0.], [ 0., 0.], [ 0., 0.], [ 0., 0.], [ 0., 0.], [ 0.,
0.], [ 0., 0.], [ 0., 0.], [ 0., 0.], [ 0., 0.]])

.. code:: python

    print('The most difficult part is the units conversion. My suggestion would be to list all the values with SI units at first place, so that we can know what units we have. Then once we encounter any English unit, we will use the *u.units to call the original units.')

The most difficult part is the units conversion. My suggestion would be
to list all the values with SI units at first place, so that we can know
what units we have. Then once we encounter any English unit, we will use
the \*u.units to call the original units.

.. code:: python

    #Getting the units to match up with what you want.
    #It was hard to keep track of where to change the units and what the units of these arrays and variables are.

    #Example
    #A plant can process 1,300 L/day.
    #The users want to know how many seconds it will take to fill their water jugs which are cylinders of radius 5 cm and height of 10 inches.

    #Answer
    plantFL = 1300 *u.l /u.day
    jugVol = (np.pi*(5*u.cm)**2)*10*u.inch
    time = (jugVol/plantFL).to(u.s)

    print('The time to fill the jug is ' + ut.sig(time,3) + '.')

The time to fill the jug is 133 s.

.. code:: python

    # In order to create a evenly spaced array use the function linspace, but take out the units and bring them back in.
    #flow_data = np.linspace(min(FR_data).to(u.mL/u.s).magnitude,max(FR_data).to(u.mL/u.s).magnitude,50)*u.mL/u.s

.. code:: python

    #indentation
    for i in range(1,5):
        for j in range(1,5):
            for k in range(1,5):
                if( i != k ) and (i != j) and (j != k):
                    print(ut.sig(i,j))

1.0 1.0 1.00 1.00 1.000 1.000 2 2 2.00 2.00 2.000 2.000 3 3 3.0 3.0
3.000 3.000 4 4 4.0 4.0 4.00 4.00

.. code:: python

    # When learning how to use python, I found the if /else if/ else statement could be confused
    # though we did not use them a lot in DC1/2, they still worth mention
    # little example attached
    x = 2

    if x < 0:
        print('x < 0')                      # executes only if x < 0
    elif x == 0:
        print('x is zero')                 # if it's not true that x < 0, check if x == 0
    elif x == 1:
        print('x == 1')                    # if it's not true that x < 0 and x != 0, check if x == 1
    else:
        print('non of the above is true')

non of the above is true

.. code:: python

    #The unit conversions from a given set of data to a graphical representation (such as mL/min given data to mL/s graphical data)

    #Make a smooth plot that represents the theoretical range of head loss values for a pipe with a minimum flow rate of 60 L/min
    #and a maximum of 110 L/min. The tube is 5 m long and has a diameter of a 1/4". It's chilly where this pipe is hanging out,
    #so the temperature is 5 degrees Celsius. It's a pretty ~cool~ pipe to say the least. The plot should be mL/s of flow vs m of head loss.

    numpoints = 50
    Diam = .25*u.inch
    Length = 5*u.m
    Temp = u.Quantity(5,u.degC)
    Nu = pc.viscosity_kinematic(Temp)
    PipeRough = .1*u.mm
    MaxFlow = 110*u.L/u.min
    MinFlow = 60*u.L/u.min
    FlowRate = (np.linspace(MinFlow.magnitude, MaxFlow.magnitude, numpoints))*(u.L/u.min)
    Headloss = pc.headloss_fric(FlowRate, Diam, Length, Nu, PipeRough)
    plt.plot(FlowRate.to(u.mL/u.s), Headloss.to(u.m), '-')
    plt.xlabel('Flow Rate (mL/s)', fontsize=20)
    plt.ylabel('Head Loss (m)', fontsize=20)
    plt.show()

    #it's not a very good pipe design, but you get the point

.. figure:: DC_Python_Tutorial_2_Solution_files/DC_Python_Tutorial_2_Solution_124_0.png
   :alt: png

   png

.. |image0| image:: Moody.png
